Why am I writing this? I've been involved in implementing and supporting enterprise software for over 20 years. In recent years I've been a product owner and one of my key jobs has been to stop the scrum teams that I work with from being distracted from their scrum work. In trying to do this I've ended up triaging tickets that are passed to Development. Lots of the tickets that I look at I end up sending back because they're missing information or questions haven't been asked that would rule a cause in or out. It's made me realise that there are repeatable steps that you can take to solve enterprise software problems in large organisations. My definition of large organisation is one that has more than one department. This document is my understanding of those steps and how I go about trying to solve problems.

Why should you bother reading this? If you're involved in implementing or supporting software in any capacity there should be something in here for you. You don't need to be a developer to understand what follows so if you're a support desk analyst, business analyst, consultant or product owner hopefully this will help you in the future. And if you are a developer maybe this will mean that next time you're presented with a problem your first instinct isn't to spend time checking out the code, running a build and trying to replicate the problem with next to no information.

There are whole industries built around problem management which may or may not use different terms to mean the same thing. I don't know I'm not qualified in any of them. However, to keep terminalogy consistent in this document I've come up with the following definitions for terms that I use throughout.

Problems are the result of causes.
Solutions solve problems.
Information is required to arrive at the solution to a problem. Information is used to arrive at a hypothesis.
Hypothesis are thought experiments that allow you to arrive at a solution to a problem.
Tickets are used to report problems. A ticket is closed when a problem is solved.

When working with software sooner or later something is going to go wrong. Either the software isn't behaving as expected or it's just not working. For the business to continue working that problem is going to have to be investigated and solved. Problem solving is a skill which can be learnt. There are certain basic approaches that apply to all problems. Clearly having knowledge of the software or business area you're working in will make it more likely that you'll solve the problem quickly, but not having this knowledge isn't an excuse for not trying or passing the problem onto someone else.

At their most basic level problems can be categorised as easy or hard. An easy problem is one that you know the answer to or can find the answer out quickly. A hard problem is neither of these things. The first time you encounter a hard problem it's likely a considerable amount of effort will be spent solving it. Having some sort of write up of the problem and its solution should mean that if the problem comes up again it will be easy to solve. Lots of organisations fail to do this for a multitude or reasons. The most obvious reason for failure is that one or both of the problem and solution aren't captured. If you think you have a good memory and you don't need to write any details down because you'll remember if the problem comes up again I've news for you; you're wrong. Write it down or you'll forget. Even if the problem and solution are documented if no one can find it then they may as well not be there. Having some means of organising or searching problems and their solutions will turn repeated hard problems into easy problems.

If you encounter a hard problem the first question you should ask yourself is "Can I solve this?" In large organisations it's not uncommon for problems to be moved around from department to department with the clear motivation to transfer responsibility of the problem to someone else. This results in problems being open for longer and ultimately meaning more work for everyone therefore negating everyone's efforts to pass the problem onto someone else. 

So back to the question of "Can I solve this myself?" Well, first a secret. Nobody you work with is a magician. To solve a problem they're going to need information. Unfortunately this isn't the movies where your resident maverick can take one look at an intractable problem and immediately come up with the solution. So what information might you need? The basics are:

What's the problem? If you can't turn to the person next to you and explain the problem then ask for more information until you can do this.
If the described problem references an error or log report has that information been added to the problem? If they haven't been added ask for them. They may tell you what the problem is and even how to fix it. I'm constantly surprised by the number of problems that reference error or log reports and no one has thought to include them.
Are there steps to reproduce and example data? Most of the time to solve a problem you're going to have to recreate it. Once it's been recreated you'll be in a position to try things to fix it. If you don't have steps to reproduce you won't know that you've fixed it.

None of those pieces of information are reliant on specialist technology or domain knowledge apart from perhaps the first one. If you're stuck on the first one this is a learning opportunity. Hopefully if you find yourself in this position you're in a relatively junior position and your line manager will be able to help you. If this isn't you then you need to find out who to talk to and learn from them. And I mean talk; email, written conversations in messenger apps or bug tracking software are no substitute for talking to a human being when it comes to learning.

If you have all the above information (and even if you haven't) can you solve this problem? Are there questions you can ask to rule out possible causes? Are there tests that the reporter of the problem could do to rule a cause? For example

* Is some bit of infrastructure actually up? 
* Was a data refresh done recently? 
* Was a new version of the software deployed or backed out? 

Again this isn't the movies. Asking questions that rule in or out possible causes won't enable you to solve the problem immediately, but they will move you closer to a solution.

A common problem raised is something doesn't work. If that's all that you've been given you have a lot of questions to ask. How does the reporter know that it's not working? It's highly likely that the person reporting the problem has tried a few things out before they've reached this conclusion. Knowing what they've tried will likely result in you being able to rule out numerous possible causes. Software problems can be the result of multiple causes, just saying that something doesn't work isn't going to lead to a swift solution. There are no magicians who can tell you how to make something work simply by being told it isn't working.

If you're lucky and there is detail on the problem's ticket work through it logically. Ask yourself based on what's gone before what would it be reasonable to try next? Be sceptical, be wary of supposition or a leap to the solution. If a problem looks impossible consider how the environment may be different from what you are used to working with. Software is frequently not installed correctly, databases can perform badly, permissions are often wrong and getting data restores right is difficult. Given the information that you have there may be a set of hypotheses that you can try. Whilst there can often be a dearth of information for a problem there may be sufficient to prove or dissprove a hypothesis. A hypothesis should always move you closer to a solution by ruling a possible cause in or out. Testing a hypothesis for the sake of it wastes time and effort. 

All of the above suggests that for hard problems you're going to have to communicate with other people, possibly customers. Communication can be written or spoken. Ahead of any communication work through where you are with the problem, confirm what you do and don't know and decide what you would like the outcome of the communication to be. Be realistic about what you might achieve. If your motive is get rid of the problem by passing it back to the customer then this will come back to bite you in the longer term as it will encourage the person you're working with to do the same to you at a later date. If you are asking for more information what will you do with it once you have it? If the answer is nothing don't ask for it. Think of hypotheses you want to test and the information that you require to do that. If you want to rule a cause in or out how might you go about doing that? State to the person you're working with why you want a particular piece of information. This will help them understand your thinking and may trigger them to recall information that until then they had discounted as irrelevent. Similarly it may enable them to solve the problem themselves. As long as the people you're working with feel that you're moving towards a solution they'll be willing to help you and furnish you with information. If you are asking questions for the sake of asking questions with no purpose you'll annoy people and they'll be less willing to help. Make it easy for the person to help you by being specific about what you need from them. If there's a log entry that you want them to look at highlight it. Don't make them wade through multiple comments to get an understanding of the problem. Summarise for them your current understanding and where you think they can help.

Don't be afraid to ask questions. If you don't understand something ask. A big mental blocker for all people to asking questions is the fear of looking stupid. As long as you can demonstrate that the rationale for asking a question is to move closer to a solution then it isn't stupid. For long running hard problems it's not uncommon for "stupid" questions to open up new avenues of investigation. Previously held assumptions that no one had challenged can be demonstrated to be incorrect and allow an investigation to move forward. If the person you're talking to is engaged and wants to assist you in solving the problem then they will ask you questions. This is a good thing. In explaining concepts to someone else it will help clarify your thinking and may open up new ways of looking at the problem that you hadn't considered. If you have a telephone call or face to face meeting don't worry about what you don't know. It is perfectly acceptable to respond to a question with "I don't know." If you end up saying this you should next say, "But I'll find out for you." It is critical for your relationship with the customer and your own personal credibility that you find out. If you are recording actions for the meeting make sure that you write down that you took the action to provide the information and do it. Sometimes customers forget that you've promised to look into something and you can get away with not providing an answer to their question. You might get away with this once or twice, but one day a customer will call you out. If you can provide your response earlier than was agreed. This makes you look professional and someone who takes their responsibilities seriously.

If you're a software supplier working with a customer there can be a tendency for them to treat you as a naughty child and the problem as entirely yours to solve. This is a frustrating attitude to encounter and unfortunately the best you can do is try to rise above it. A customer's condescending attitude is likely to be a result of working with other suppliers who have been unhelpful, didn't take their issue seriously and needed to be closely managed. This can be an opportunity to build a better relationship with the customer if you can demonstrate that you take their concerns seriously and follow the approaches described above. Another behaviour that you can sometimes encounter is a customer's insistence that a problem is very important and that it needs to be progressed immediately. Again this may be a consequence of their experience with other suppliers. As with all problems you will probably have competing priorities for your time and a customer's request that a problem should be looked at urgently should be taken into consideration. This blog's intention isn't to cover off how to priortise your work so I won't comment further on this. At some stage you will need to pass the ticket back to the customer. This could be for a variety of reasons including you think you've solved the problem and you'd like them to confirm this or you need more information. It's not unusual when a ticket is passed back to a customer that its urgency plummets. Thankfully I have more practical advice here than to just rise above it. Make clear in communicating with the customer that you need them to do something. Record on the ticket that the action is with the customer and the information that you require from them. Don't assign the ticket to them with no comment on why you are doing this. This can be especially useful in the future when the customer asks why their problem hasn't been progressed.

Solving software problems is difficult. Software developers are very clever people. They will have already taken reasonable steps to prevent problems with the software from happening and will also have attempted to provide information if something does go wrong. Just the occurence of a software problem means that something unexpected has happened and based on this alone it is likely to be difficult to solve. All is not lost. Computers are logical and deterministic. By following the practises I've outlined above and working through the problem in a logical manner the solution to all software problems can be identified eventually.
